# Object Basics I

### Introduction

In JavaScript, along with primitives we have objects. Objects allow you to map keys to values. For example, the key `'name'` could map to `"Tim"`. Or the key `'isInstructor'` could map to the boolean `true`. These are example of key value mappings. When you want to know the name property of the object, you look it up and get the value back, which is `"Tim"` in this case. Here is an example of declaring an object:

~~~
var firstObj = {
  firstName: "Tim",
  lastName: "Garcia",
  isInstructor: true
};
~~~

In this object, we have keys of `"firstName"`, `"lastName"`, and `"isInstructor"` and values of `"Tim"`, `"Garcia"`, and `true` respectively.

Notice the format of an object. It has a key, followed by a colon, followed by a value, then a comma. But the last key and value in the object omits the comma. Forgetting the comma is an error that you may run into from time to time. Try putting the following in your console. You should see an error, `Uncaught SyntaxError: Unexpected identifier`, because there is no comma after the `firstName` key and value:

~~~
var firstObj = {
  firstName: "Tim"
  lastName: "Garcia",
  isInstructor: true
};
~~~

After we have created an object, the first thing we may want to do with it is access the values using the object's keys.

### Accessing Object Values

To access values in an object, we could use the dot notation:

~~~
firstObj.firstName;       // returns "Tim"
firstObj.lastName;        // returns "Garcia"
firstObj.isInstructor;    // returns true
firstObj.keyDoesntExist;  // returns undefined
~~~

Or we could use the bracket notation:

~~~
firstObj["firstName"];       // returns "Tim"
firstObj["lastName"];        // returns "Garcia"
firstObj["isInstructor"];    // returns true
firstObj["keyDoesntExist"];  // returns undefined
~~~

We will learn the difference between these two later on.

Objects are one of the built-in types in JavaScript and consist of unordered key-value pairs. Let's look at another object:

~~~
var tim = {
  name: "Tim",
  catOwner: true,
  boatOwner: true
};
~~~

In the object above we have a set of keys (`name`, `catOwner`, `boatOwner`) and values (`"Tim"`, `true` and `true`).

### Bracket Notation vs Dot Notation

If we want to access values in the object we can do it two different ways: either using brackets (`[]`) or dot notation. Let's take a look at both.

~~~
var obj = {
  firstName: "Elie",
  lastName: "Schoppik",
  favoriteColor: "purple",
  job: "instructor",
  isDeveloper: true
};

obj.firstName; // Elie
obj["lastName"]; // Schoppik
obj[favoriteColor]; // This gives us an error, because there is no variable called favoriteColor!
~~~

So which one should we use? Well, best practice is to use the dot notation _if you can use it_. But there are cases in which you'll need to use bracket notation. Let's take a look at this example:

~~~
var obj = {};
var person = "Tom";

obj[person] = "This is a person";
obj[1+1+1] = "Three";

obj;


/*
obj now should look like this: 
{
    Tom: "This is a person",
    3: "Three"
}
*/

obj.3;// Syntax Error! Can't use the dot notation with a number
obj[3]; // "Three" - we NEED to use the bracket notation
obj[person]; // "This is a person" it works because the var person has the name Tom contained in it.
obj["Tom"]; // "This is a person"
obj.person; // undefined this is because the key is not person it is Tom.
~~~

In short, use the bracket notation when you need to evaluate some expression or pass in a variable to get the name of the key, but when you know the name of the key and it is not a variable or expression, always use the dot notation.

# Exercises

For these exercises, create:

- objects-09.html
- objects-09.js

And use the developer tools in chrome to run and monitor the script.

## objects-09.html

~~~
<html> 
  <head>
    <title>JavaScript Test Site</title>
    <script src="objects-09.js"></script>
  </head>
  <body>
    <p>Nothing going on yet.</p>
  </body>
</html>
~~~

# Exercise 1

- Create a goMark object that has 'url', 'description', and 'rating' as keys. Initialise the object with some values and log to the console.
